# Natural Language-Driven SQL Query Generation and Reporting using Generative AI

The ever-increasing volume and complexity of data and ever evolving technologies and analytical tools and methodologies necessitate the expertise to use advanced tools and methods for data analysis and reporting. Use of SQL languages to query databases can be intimidating for non-technical people, beginners and common-man and requires special knowledge to get the insights that they need. This creates a barrier for non-technical people for extracting and analysing the data and creates dependency on people and additional tools to get the required information efficiently. This project aims to reduce this gap by making use of Generative AI to build a system capable of translating natural language queries into SQL statements and generating informative, insightful and comprehensive reports, thereby making the data analysis and visualisation accessible to all. 

This project, titled “Natural Language-Driven SQL Query Generation and Reporting using Generative AI” aims to utilize the advanced Natural language processing (NLP) techniques and Machine learning models to interpret and comprehend user queries asked in everyday language. We can then make use of Generative AI and Large language models (LLM) to understand the intent behind the queries, semantics and then materialize them into accurate SQL queries that could be used to query from target databases. Also, the results can be formatted to build user friendly reports, insightful visualizations to aid in data analysis. 

Main components of this system include a natural language comprehension module, a model to predict and generate a SQL query, another module to build reports and visualizations and a simplified user interface to input queries and fetch insights. Comprehension module understands the common language and convert it into machine understandable format, while model and SQL generators predict the requirement and generate the SQL query needed. Report generator takes metadata of the source data and the type of report needed as input and builds simplified reports. We can interact with the model using the user-interface. 

For the system to work effectively, we might have to provide metadata of the databases, columns, data-types and few sample data so that it understands the tabular structure, column data-types and actual data that helps in providing more relevant and precise outputs. Also, we need to make sure that the system provides syntactically correct SQL queries and meaningful reports. We can train the model to generate simpler reports as a Excel/CSV file, PDF or simpler images that contain charts and other type of visualisations. While it may be too ambitious to expect the current developed system to provide advanced reports and dashboards, further work on this field with more advanced techniques would help in building the same. 

The outcomes of this project work are multi-fold. For management and people at top level hierarchies in an organization and non-technical people, this tool serves as a ready reckoner and quick help tool to get the required results quickly and reduces dependency on technical staff, which enhances productivity and decision making process. For data analysts and experts, this could reduce the basic and routine report generating tasks and 5 helps them automate these mundane processes and thereby saving them time and efforts which could be utilized for working on advanced tasks. 

In summary, this project aims to build a simple yet revolutionary method for interfacing everyday language and advanced SQL queries and reporting by harnessing the power of Natural language processing and Generative AI. Also, this helps organizations to embed this as quick help tools to help the non-technical members, thus making data analytics, data driven decisions and reports accessible to all. 

### Key Words: Natural Language Processing, Generative AI, Machine Learning, SQL, Visualisation and reporting
